Hi.
I'm Sergei Savin.
I'm an associate professor in the
Department of Operations, Information, and
Decisions at the Wharton School.
I will be guiding you through weeks two
and three of operations analytics course.
In week one, you have looked at
the ways and means of describing and
forecasting uncertain outcomes.
You've also been introduced
to a quintessential problem
of matching demand with
supply in uncertain settings.
A newsvendor problem.
In order to successfully tackle
a newsvendor challenge, we must understand
how to, first, evaluate any course of
action when faced with uncertainty.
And, second, choose the best course of
action out of all possible alternatives.
In weeks two and three,
we will learn how to use two basic
business analytics tool kits
to accomplish this tasks.
First, in week two, we will focus
on the optimization tool kit, and
see how the best alternative is
selected among many choices,
incidents with low uncertainty.
Then, in week three we will look
at high uncertainty settings, and
we'll use the simulation
toolkit to evaluate reward and
risk associated with any
possible course of action.
All this will prepare you for
week four, when this optimization and
simulation tool kits will be used
together to identify the optimal choice.
Let's begin.
In week two, we will look at how
to identify the best decisions
in settings with low uncertainty.
We'll have three class
sessions in week two.
In the first session, we'll look at an
example of a resource allocation problem
faced by a manufacturing company.
Our focus will be on describing this
problem in terms of decisions the company
must make, the objective it wants to
achieve, and the constraints it faces.
We'll build an analytics model that
expresses this problem using formulas
that will help us later to conduct
a spreadsheet-based search for
the best decision.
In session two,
we'll convert the analytics model,
built in session one, into a spreadsheet
form, and use an Excel add in called,
Solver, to find the best course of action.
Finally, in session three we will model
another decision frequently encountered in
practice.
A decision that involves shipping
goods through a network of supply and
demand locations.
As in sessions one and two,
we will build an analytics model
describing the network management problem,
convert it into a spreadsheet formulation
and identify the best option using Solver.
Let's start our session one.
We start our analysis of how
to make the best decisions in
low uncertainty environments by
looking at this small example.
In this example, a scooter manufacturer
called Zooter, is faced with a problem of
allocating its limited resources between
its two main products, Razor and Navajo.
Navajos are slightly more
profitable than Razors.
$160 of profit contribution per unit,
versus $150.
The company is small and
it projects that this profit margins will
not be affected by the number of scooters
it can realistically produce and
place on the market.
Each scooter model requires the use
of each of three resources.
It must go through frame manufacturing,
wheels and deck assembly, and
quality assurance and packaging.
Razor and Navajo scooters require
different amounts of each resource.
For example,
in order to produce one Razor scooter,
the company must spend 4 hours
in manufacturing the frame,
1.5 hours in wheels and deck assembly,
and 1 hour in Q and A and packaging.
And, the corresponding numbers for
Navajo scooter is 5, 2, and .8 hours.
So, as you can see, Navajos are more
profitable, take less time to do Q and
A and packaging, but use quite a more
of frame manufacturing and wheels and
deck assembly hours.
In this problem.
Zooter wants to plan its
production from the coming week.
And, during that week,
it estimates that its resources
will have the following limits.
It will have 5,610 hours of
frame manufacturing available,
2,200 hours of wheels and
deck assembly available, and
1,200 hours of quality assurance and
packaging available.
So, it wants to decide how many
units of each scooter model
should it plan to produce next week, so
that its limited resources are allocated
in the most profitable way?
Note that all the data we use in this
example are certain non-random quantities.
In other words,
each piece of data is a single number
rather than a multi-valued
probability distribution.
For example,
we assume that one razor scooter will make
a profit contribution of exactly $150.
And, that its frame will take
exactly four hours to manufacture.
What this implies is that any
production plan Zooter chooses for
the next week will result in certain
non-random outcomes in terms of profit
as well as resource consumption.
The absence of randomness
is a very powerful help
in the task of evaluating different
courses of action and selecting the best.
In the absence of uncertainty, even very
large problems, in other words, problems
with very large numbers of products and
resources, are easier to tackle.
Assuming away uncertainty may justified
in situations where a company,
faced with a decision, exercises fairly
strong control over its business
environment, either because it
considers the short term planning or
because it benefits from longer term
contracts that allow it to confidently
predict future data parameters.
Naturally, this may not be such a good
assumption in settings where significant
uncertain factors influencing the outcomes
of managerial actions are present.
We will have a closer look at this more
complex settings in weeks three and four.
Okay, let's return to
the Zooter situation.
The analysis of any problem focused on
finding the best course of action, or,
using another word,
on optimizing the course of action,
must start by identifying
the decision variables.
Decision variables reflect
actions that a manager or
company must choose to
achieve a desired outcome.
In a Zooter example,
the company must decide upon the numbers
of each scooter model to produce.
So, the decision variables are R,
the number of Razor scooters to
produce in the coming week, and
N, the number of Navajo scooters
to produce in the coming week.
A solution is the particular choice
of these decision variables.
Such as 500 and 500.
So, if Zooter sets its
decision variables to 500 and
500 It will earn 155,000 in profit.
This calculation brings us to another
important component of
an optimization model, an objective.
Objective is a criterion such as profit or
cost, that a company wants to make as
big as possible or as small as possible.
In the Zooter case,
the objective is a profit and
the company wants to maximize it.
It is important to remember that once
we decide upon values of the decision
variables, we should be able to
calculate the value of the objective.
For example, if the number of
Razor scooters produces R and
the number of Navajo scooters produces N,
the chief profit value will be
150*R + 160*N.
The formula that expresses objective
as a function of decision variables,
is called an objective function.
And, the objective function value is
what we get if we plug in a particular
combination of decision variable
values into the objective function.
So if we plug in 500 and
500 into that formula,
we get the objective
function value of 155,000.
Constraints form the third building
block of an optimization model.
If Zooter makes 500 of each scooter model,
how much of each limited
resource will this require?
Well, on the frame manufacturing front,
Zooter will need 4,500 hours.
No problem,
it has many more hours available.
Well, whatever combination of decision
variables user selects, the number of
required manufacturing hours cannot be
higher than the number of available hours.
This is what we mean by constraint.
Let's see how our production
plan of 500 of each mode
fares in terms of other
resources it requires.
It is okay from the point of view
of wheels and deck assembly hours.
What it requires, 1750 hours,
does not exceed what Zooter has available,
2200 hours.
The same is true regarding Q and
A and packaging hours.
The required number 900, does not
exceed the availability that is 1,200.
We call a solution like
that a feasible solution.
What if the Zooter decides to
produce 500 Razor scooters, and
bump up the production of
Navajo scooters to 750 units?
Well, this production plan requires more
frame manufacturing hours than Zooter has.
And, more wheels and
deck assembly hours than Zooter has.
Well, it is still within our limit on
the number of Q and A and packaging hours,
1100 required,
as compared to 1200 available, but
We still cannot implement it because of
what it requires from other resources.
We call such a solution infeasible.
Note that, for
the solution to be infeasible, it does
not have to violate all constraints.
Even violating one is enough.
So, if we want to write a constraint on
the number of frame manufacturing hours as
a formula that contains decision
variables R and N how do we do it?
Well, in words we'll wanna say
that the number of required
frame manufacturing hours may not
exceed the number of available hours.
And, as a formula, we can write
4*R +5*N ≤ 5,610.
What we have on the left hand side of this
constraint, to the left of the less or
equal than sign,
is number of frame manufacturing hours
required by any pair of R and N.
Four hours for each unit of R and
five hours of each unit of N.
And, what we have on the right hand inside
of this constraint, to the right of
the less or equal than sign, is the number
of frame manufacturing hours available.
Now we can write similar expressions for
the constraints on
the other two resources.
The first line is the expression for
the constraint on the number of wheels and
deck assembly hours, and the second for
the constraint on the number of Q and
A and packaging hours available.
So, are there any other
constraints we must have?
Well, we must make sure that our R and
N variables cannot be fractional.
In other words,
we cannot decide to produce, for example,
467.4 Navajo scooters, since 0.4
scooters do not really sell well.
So, R and
N must be integer numbers like 350 or 878.
Finally, for obvious reasons, we cannot
produce negative numbers of scooters.
So, let us put it all together.
We want to choose the values of
our decision variables R and
N to make as much profit as possible.
That's 150*R + 160*N.
While making sure that we do not
exceed resource availabilities and
that we manufacture integer,
non-negative scooter numbers.
A model like that, in other words,
the model that uses formulas that
express objective function and
constraints in terms of decision
variables, is called an algebraic model.
Once we convert this algebraic
formulation into a spreadsheet format,
Solver will be the tool that
will optimize the model.
In other words, it will find for us, the
best combination of decision variables.
A few things to keep in mind.
An optimization module can have many
decision variables and constraints, but
it can only have one objective.
But, what if a company's
interest in a number of
so-called key performance indicators,
such as profit, cost,
customer service levels, etc?
While in general,
it is impossible to optimize all of
the key performance indicators at
the same time, you can always do this.
You can choose one of them
to be an objective and
treat the rest of them
as constraining factors.
For example, you can try to
maximize profit while making sure
that the resource utilization does
not exceed some threshold level.
Here, a profit is chosen as an objective,
and
a resource utilization forms a constraint.
Another thing to keep in mind,
is that some models are easier
to tackle than others.
Look at the Zooter model.
It contained constants, products of
decision variables and constants,
and the addition, it can also contain
subtraction, of the resulting expressions.
Models like that are called linear,
since they contain only linear
functions of decision variables.
Linear models in general
are easier to optimize.
In other words, optimization software,
like Solver, or any commercial software,
will have an easier time in
identifying the best decision.
Then their harder to optimize models.
One example of harder
models is nonlinear models.
When a model contains products of decision
variables, ratios of decision variables,
powers of roots of decision variables,
anything beyond linear function.
Such model is nonlinear, and
those models are harder to optimize.
Especially, if they have large
numbers of variables and constraints.
Even if you're model is linear, adding
integer requirements on the decision
variables, can also significantly
complicate optimization process.
So, to summarize,
the easiest class of models to deal with
are linear models with variables that
are allowed to take any fractional values.
We will see such a model in
session three of this week.
If you add integer requirements to
the variables of your model, or
make it non-linear, or especially
if you do both at the same time,
you're making the model harder to
optimize, whether you're using Solver or
some commercial optimization software.
This distinction may not be that important
for a small problem, like the problem
that Zooter is trying to solve,
two variables and three constraints.
But, it can become quite important
if the numbers of variables and
constraints in your model is large.
If you would like to learn more
about optimization, and the types of
optimization models, there's a number
of books out there that can help you.
Here are two examples.
In this session, we have looked at the
task of selecting the best decision among
many alternatives,
in settings where each piece of data
that goes into a decision making
process is known with certainty.
As an example we looked at a small
instance of a resource allocation problem
in which two products are competing for
limited resources.
Using his example,
we have identified three elements that
any optimization model will have.
Decision variables,
an objective function, and constraints.
Even in low-uncertainty settings,
the task of identifying the best
decision may become very challenging
as the sheer number of possible
decisions can be very large.
So, we may often need the help of
an optimization tool, such as Solver.
Now, before using software
to find the best decision,
it is very useful to express the problem
using an algebraic language.
In particular, it can be much easier to
identify modelling mistakes by looking at
an algebraic formulation than
by looking at a spreadsheet.
And, an algebraic formulation may also
help you to create a well-structured,
easy to read spreadsheet formulation.
In the next session we'll focus on
converting an algebraic formulation
of the Zooter problem we created,
into a spreadsheet formulation and
on using Solver to identify
the best production decision.
See you soon.